Sachin Tendulkar's emotional speech
All my friends, settle down, let me talk, I will get more and more emotional. My life — between 22 yards for 24 years — it is hard to believe that that wonderful journey has come to an end. But I would like to take this opportunity to thank people who have played an important role in my life. Also, for the first time in my life, I am carrying this list, to remember all the names in case I forget someone. I hope you understand. It's getting a little bit difficult to talk, but I will manage.

The most important person in my life, and I have missed him a lot since 1999 when he passed away, was my father. Without his guidance, I don't think I would have been standing here in front of you. He gave me freedom at the age of 11, and told me, 'Chase your dreams, but make sure you do not find short cuts. The path might be difficult, but don't give up'. And I have followed his instructions. Above all, he told me to be a nice human being, which I will continue to try, and try my best. Every time I have done something special, showed my bat, it was for my father.

My mother... I don't know how she dealt with such a naughty child like me. I was not easy to manage. She must be extremely patient. For a mother, the most important thing is that her child remains safe and healthy and fit. That was what she was most bothered and worried about. She has taken care of me for the past 24 years that I have played for India, but even before that, she started praying for me the day I started playing cricket... Her prayers and blessings have given me the strength to go out and perform. So a big thank you to my mother for all the sacrifices.

In my school days, for four years, I stayed with my uncle and aunt because my school was quite far from my home, and they treated me like their son. Ater a hard day's play, I would be half asleep, and my aunt would be feeding me food so I could go again and play the next day. I can't forget these moments. I am like their son and I am glad it has continued to be the same way.

My eldest brother Nitin and his family have always encouraged me. My eldest brother doesn't like to talk much, but the one thing he always told me is that 'Whatever you do, I know you will always give it 100 per cent, and that I have full faith and confidence in you'. His encouragement meant a lot to me.

My sister Savita and her family were no different. The first cricket bat of my life was presented to me by my sister. It was a Kashmir willow bat. But that is where the journey began. She is one of those many who still continue to fast when I bat. So thank you very much.

Ajit, my brother, now what do I talk about him? I don't know... We have lived this dream together. He was the one who sacrificed his career for my cricket. He spotted the spark in me. And it all started from the age of 11 when he took me to (Ramakant) Achrekar Sir, my coach, and from there on my life changed. You will find this hard to believe but even last night he called up to discuss my dismissal. Knowing that there was a remote chance of batting again, but just the habit we have developed, the rapport we have developed, since my birth, has continued and it will continue. Maybe when I'm not playing cricket we will still be discussing technique.

Various things we agreed upon, my technique, and so many technical things on which I didn't agree with him... We have had arguments and disagreements, but when I look back at all these things in my life, I would have been a lesser cricketer...

The most beautiful thing happened to me in 1990 when I met my wife Anjali. Those were special years and it has continued and will always continue that way. I know Anjali, being a doctor, there was a wonderful career in front of her. When we decided to have a family, Anjali took the initiative to step back and say that 'You continue with your cricket and I will take the responsibility of the family'.

Without that I don't think I would have been able to play cricket freely and without stress. Thanks for bearing with all my fuss and all my frustrations, and all sorts of rubbish that I have spoken. Thanks for bearing with me and always staying by my side through all the ups and downs. You are the best partnership I've had in my life.

Then the two precious diamonds of my life, Sara and Arjun. They have already grown up. My daughter is 16, my son is 14. Time has flown by. I wanted to spend so much time with them on special occasions like their birthdays, their annual days, their sports days, going on holidays, whatever. I have missed out on all those things. Thanks for your understanding. Both of you have been so, so special to me you cannot imagine. I promise you that for 14 and 16 years I have not spent enough time with both of you, but the next 16 years or even beyond that, everything is for you.

My in-laws, Anand Mehta and Annabelle, both have been so, so supportive, loving and caring. I have discussed various things in life generally with them, and have taken their advice. You know, it's so important to have a strong family who is always with you and who are guiding you. Before you start clapping, the most important thing they did was allowing me to marry Anjali. So thank you very much.

In the past 24 years that I have played for India, I have made new friends, and before that I have had friends from my childhood. They have all had a terrific contribution. As and when I have called them to come and bowl to me at the nets, they have left their work aside to come and help me. Be it joining me on holidays and having discussions with me on cricket, or when I was a little stressed and wanting to find a solution so I could perform better.

All those moments my friends were with me. When I was injured, I would wake up in the morning because I couldn't sleep and thought that my career was over because of injuries, that is when my friends have woken up at 3 o'clock in the morning to drive with me and make me believe that my career was not over. Life would be incomplete without all those friends. Thanks for being there for me.

My cricket career started when I was 11. The turning point of my career was when my brother (Ajit) took me to Achrekar Sir. I was extremely delighted to see him up in the stands. Normally he sits in front of the television and he watches all the games that I play. When I was 11 or 12, those were the days when I used to hop back on his scooter and play a couple of practice matches a day. The first half of the innings I would be batting at Shivaji Park, the second half at some other match in Azad Maidan. He would take me all over Mumbai to make sure I got match practice.

On a lighter note, in the last 29 years, Sir has never ever said 'well played' to me because he thought I would get complacent and I would stop working hard. Maybe he can push his luck and wish me now well done on my career, because there are no more matches Sir in my life. I will be witnessing cricket, and cricket will always stay in my heart, but you have had an immense contribution in my life. So thank you very much.

My cricket for Mumbai started right here on this ground, the Mumbai Cricket Association (MCA)... I remember landing from New Zealand at 4 o'clock in the morning and turning up for a game here at 8 o'clock just because I wanted to be a part of Mumbai cricket, not that somebody forced me. That was for the love of Mumbai cricket... The president is here so thank you very much, along with your team, for taking care of me and looking after my cricket.

The dream was obviously to play for India, and that is where my association with the BCCI started. The BCCI was fantastic, right from my debut they believed in my ability and selecting me into the squad at the age of 16 was a big step. So thanks to all the selectors for having faith in me and the BCCI for giving me the freedom to express myself out in the middle. Things would have been different if you had not been behind me, and I really appreciate your support. Especially when I was injured, you were right with me and making sure that all the treatments were taken care of, and that I got fit and fine and playing (right) back for India.

The journey has been special. The last 24 years I have played with many senior cricketers, and even before that there were many senior cricketers with whom I watched on television. They inspired me to play cricket, and to play the right way...

We see it on the mega-screen, Rahul, Laxman, Sourav and Anil, who is not here, and my team-mates right here in front me. You are like my family away from home. I have had some wonderful times with you. It is going to be difficult to not be part of the dressing room, sharing those special moments. All the coaches for their guidance, it has been special for me.

When M S Dhoni presented me the 200th Test match cap on Day One morning, I had a brief message for the team. I would like to repeat that. I just feel that all of us are so, so fortunate and proud to be part of the Indian cricket team and serving the nation. Knowing all of you guys, I know you will continue to serve the nation in the right spirit and right values. I believe we have been the lucky ones to be chosen by the Almighty to serve this sport. Each generation gets this opportunity to take care of this sport and serve it to the best of our ability. I have full faith in you to continue to serve the nation in the right spirit and to the best of your ability, to bring all the laurels to the country. All the very best.

I would be failing in my duties if I did not thank all the doctors, the physios, the trainers who have put this difficult body together to go back on the field and be able to play. The amount of injuries that I have had in my career, I don't know how you have managed to keep me fit... The doctors have met me at weird hours. I have called them from Mumbai to Chennai, Mumbai to Delhi, I mean wherever. They have just taken the next flight and left their work and families to be with me, which has allowed me to play. So a big thank you to all three of you for keeping me in good shape.

My dear friend, late Mark Mascarenhas, my first manager. We unfortunately lost him in a car accident in 2001, but he was such a well-wisher of cricket, my cricket, and especially Indian cricket. He was so passionate. He understood what it takes to represent a nation and gave me all the space to go out and express myself, and never pressured me to do this ad or promotion or whatever the sponsors demanded. He took care of that and today I miss him, so thank you Mark for all your contribution.

My current management team, WSG, for repeating what Mark has done, because when I signed the contract I told them exactly what I want from them, and what it requires to represent me. They have done that and respected that.

Someone who has worked closely with me for 14 years is my manager, Vinod Nayudu. He is more like my family and all the sacrifices, spending time away from his family for my work, has been special. So a big thank you to his family as well for giving up so much time for my work with Vinod.

In my school days, when I performed well, the media backed me a lot. They continue to do that till this morning. Thank you so much to the media for supporting and appreciating my performances. It surely had a positive effect on me. Thank you so much to all the photographers as well for those wonderfully captured moments that will stay with me for the rest of my life...

I know my speech is getting a bit too long, but this is the last thing I want to say. I want to thank all the people here who have flown in from various parts of the world, and have supported me endlessly, whether I scored a 0 or a 100-plus. Your support was so dear to me and meant a lot to me. Whatever you have done for me.

I know I have met so many guys who have fasted for me, prayed for me, done so much for me. Without that life wouldn't have been like this for me. I want to thank you from the bottom of my heart, and also say that time has flown by rather quickly, but the memories you have left with me will always be with me forever and ever, especially 'Sachin, Sachin' which will reverberate in my ears till I stop breathing. Thank you very much. If I have missed out on saying something, I hope you understand.

Goodbye.